---
title: "Giant Planet Scatterings and Collisions: Hydrodynamics, Merger-Ejection Branching Ratio, and Properties of the Remnants"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/paper-LLAP2021
excerpt: "<ins><b>Jiaru Li</b></ins>, Dong Lai, Kassandra Anderson, and Bonan Pu, <i>MNRAS</i> 501, 1621, 2021"
date: 2020-12-08
venue: "Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society"
paperurl: 
citation:
---

<ins><b>Jiaru Li</b></ins>, Dong Lai, Kassandra Anderson, and Bonan Pu

<b>Publication:</b>  Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 501, 1621, 2021

<b>Abstract:</b> Planetary systems with sufficiently small orbital spacings can experience planetary mergers and ejections. The branching ratio of mergers vs ejections depends sensitively on the treatment of planetary close encounters. Previous works have adopted a simple "sticky-sphere" prescription, whose validity is questionable. We apply both smoothed particle hydrodynamics and $N$-body integrations to investigate the fluid effects in close encounters between gas giants and the long-term evolution of closely-packed planetary systems.  Focusing on parabolic encounters between Jupiter-like planets with $M_J$ and $2M_J$, we find that quick mergers occur when the impact parameter $r_p$ (the pericenter separation between the planets) is less than $2R_J$, and the merger conserved at least $97\%$ of the initial mass. Strong tidal effects can affect the "binary-planet" orbit when $r_p$ is between $2R_J$ and $4R_J$. We quantify these effects using a set of fitting formulae that can be implemented in $N$-body codes.  We run a suite of $N$-body simulations with and without the formulae for systems of two giant planets initially in unstable, nearly circular and nearly coplanar orbits. The fluid (tidal) effects significantly increase the branching ratio of planetary mergers relative to ejections by doubling the effective collision radius. While the fluid effects do not change the distributions of semi-major axis and eccentricity of each type of remnant planets (mergers vs surviving planets in ejections), the overall orbital properties of planet scattering remnants are strongly affected due to the branching ratio change. We also find that the merger products have broad distributions of spin magnitudes and obliquities.

<b>Paper links:</b>  [[publisher]](https://academic.oup.com/mnras/article/501/2/1621/6027698) [[arXiv]](https://arxiv.org/abs/2006.10067) [[NASA ADS]](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021MNRAS.501.1621L/abstract)
