---
title: "Intruder Alert: Breaking Resonant Chains with Planetesimal Flybys"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/paper-LOR2025
excerpt: "<ins><b>Jiaru Li</b></ins>, Christopher E. O'Connor, and Frederic A. Rasio <i>arXiv:2510.18955</i>"
date: 2025-10-21
venue: "Submitted to the Astrophysical Journal Letters"
paperurl: 
citation:
---

<ins><b>Jiaru Li</b></ins>, Christopher E. O'Connor, and Frederic A. Rasio <i>arXiv:2510.18955</i>

<b>Publication:</b>  	arXiv:2510.18955

<b>Abstract:</b> The orbital architectures of compact exoplanet systems record their complicated dynamical histories. Recent research supports the ``breaking-the-chains'' hypothesis, which proposes that compact systems typically form in chains of mean-motion resonances (MMRs) but subsequently break out on a 100Myr timescale. We investigate a scenario for breaking the chains through intermittent flybys of planetesimals originating from a distant reservoir. Using -body simulations and semi-analytical calculations, we characterize the disruption of MMRs through these flybys. We find a planetesimal reservoir of total mass 0.04 M_Earth is required to disrupt MMR chains, depending on the mass distribution and the typical number of flybys executed by each planetesimal. We verify that systems disrupted in this way are frequently unstable to close encounters within 100Myr of the final flyby. This mechanism operates in systems with both a sufficiently massive reservoir and an efficient mechanism for planetesimal injection. Consequently, we predict an anti-correlation between resonant inner systems and dynamically active outer configurations.

<b>Paper links:</b>  [publisher]  [[arXiv]](https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.18955)  [[NASA ADS]](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2025arXiv251018955L/abstract)
